Did the church discourage or forbid
relationships with your family and with your
former friends? And what did that have to do in the
indoctrination process?
The unified family name that they go under
sometimes, or they weren't at that time, I don't
know if they use that name anymore or not. is a
reference to the fact that they believed the
church to be the new family of God. It's sort of a
tribal concept. Moon and his wife are seen as being
the true parents of mankind, which Adam and Eve
could not be because they had a premature sexual
relationship. And all of the members of the church
are grafted into that family, in a sense, into the
true family. because of that, this becomes your
real family.
And so relationships to the former family and
former friends are only for the purpose, solely
for the purpose of getting them involved in the
church, getting them to make different kinds of
commitments to the church, whether they will join
or not, making financial commitments, material
commitments, whatever they are. Now, this, of
course, if you believe that this is the true
family, and it's the only thing to be involved
with... Paul, no, don't do that now. Then it
makes sense that if you love these people, you'll
want them to do this. But it's a classic example of
ends justifies the means, in that whatever you do
to your family or for your family is only for the
purpose of getting them involved with the church.
And so all real love and affection that you can have
is channeled into pro-group activity.
And of course, the effect of that is to minimize and
hopefully neutralize any influence from your
formal life on people. Of course, that's very
difficult to do to a 100% kind of degree. But I think
this is sort of like a corporate takeover in some
ways. You only have to have 51% finally, although a
person who's going to vacillate that much is not
much good to the church. but everyone has little
corners of their psyche that resist control but
even that resisting control becomes part of the
control because you have guilt feelings about
that and so that makes you that much stronger and so
if you do if your parents do have some influence on
you they do make you feel guilty about being
involved or they do make you feel anxiety, that
ends up making your commitment to the church that
much stronger because the negative response
against that, the guilt, is part of what connects
you to the church.
My relationship with most of my friends at the time
I joined the church were very unsatisfactory. The
relationship with my girlfriend at that
particular point was frustrating, not because we
didn't care about each other a lot, but because she
was going to the Ivory Coast the following year.
And also I was just not interested in being
married. While I wasn't ready to propose by any
means, it was a different kind of relationship
that I was looking forward to. So there was really a
lot of... a lot of things contributing to the
decline of the influence of my friends and my
family in my life at that time, which, again, is
typical of college students. I mean, that's a big
part of what college is about, a lot of what makes
them vulnerable to begin with. But the church
certainly
extends that. Is this all the coffee? Yeah. She
wants some, too. Can you pour half of it in? Sure.
Thank you. That's fine.
You need so many people here. I don't know if you're
ready for this one. Okay.
Explain how the divine principle differs from
Christian theology. Put in the new tape.
Briefly. Briefly, right. 25 words or less. Well,
essentially, different people approach it
different ways, but essentially Christianity is
based on the concept of grace and forgiveness. A
sacrifice which, made by Christ,
made it possible for people who were separated
from God and sinners to be accepted on the basis of
his sacrifice. The idea of grace is a difficult one
for many people. The Jews have a real hard time with
it. Jewish theologians, that's the thing that
gets in the way, I think, as much as anything else.
They feel like that's saying that God is not just.
And I can understand that. And particularly a
group that's had so much, oh, you didn't want to
feel like this. but has been treated so unjustly
throughout the years, that's really hard for them
to deal with. But I think that's the essential
basis of Christianity now. The book of James has
all the business about faith without works is
dead, so you get the Protestant work ethic coming
through there, and you have a lot of people in
Protestantism probably who are trying to earn
their salvation, whether they have that theology
or not. But the Unification Church is definitely
an earn-your-salvation church. I mean, that's a
major theological point. They call it the concept
of indemnity, and it's a matter of making
spiritual restitution for past sins. And while
Moon has, in some ways, done it for the whole world,
each of us has to do it on our own. And so you have
processes of fasting and taking cold showers for
long periods and doing lots of different things to
pay indemnity for some kind of spiritual price. So
that's a huge difference. There are carryovers
from a lot of oriental cultural and religious
ideas. The importance of ancestors, the
spiritual relationships, or the spirits of the
ancestors are seen as being very important. They
must be released from their spiritual world
prisons by special prayers and rituals. I
participated in some of those. It was really wild.
Fascinating, fascinating. The view of
Christology, because of the idea of grace, is very
different. They see that the Christ was supposed
to have been the conquering hero, not conquering
in the sense of necessarily having to be a military
conqueror, although military might play a role in
the Unification Church's anti-communist stand,
for sure. I don't think in the long run that it's
really a military takeover. although elements in
the church are certainly present where if it
needed to go that direction, it could. But the view
of Christology, essentially, is that Christ came
to take a bride and to establish the heavenly, the
perfect family, true family, to become the true
parent. And that's the way they refer to him and his
wife as the true parents. So that's very
different. sort of millennialist, some
similarities there. There actually is a group of
Jews, I think, that believes that the fall was
essentially a sexual fall. I forget which group,
but I've heard that fact. But in terms of
differences from Christianity, I would say the
business of grace versus works is probably the
biggest one in the view of what Christ came to do.
The view toward the Bible, of course, they have to
be willing to use the Bible rather than follow the
Bible because these views that they have do really
justice to a lot of
the stuff that's in the text. Did you believe that
Reverend Maine was the Messiah? Yeah,
definitely. All the members of the church. I
shouldn't say all. It's rumored that one of the
high-ranking theologians has her doubts about
her. But essentially, being a member of the church
means accepting that fact, or at least living as
though that were true. Because that's what the
whole thing is predicated on. And they'll deny
that, of course.
After you joined the group, where did you live? I
stayed in Manhattan, lived in the center in
Manhattan for a while. I actually went... I was
actually at home, that is to say in Newton, for a
fairly long period during that first summer, and
in the hospital for a while trying to get rid of an
ulcer that I had picked up during the school year.
During that time, the church members visited me.
My dad tried to talk with me, but at that point my
commitment was a young enough one But it was pretty
rabid. And essentially, I didn't really want to
talk with people about it too much. I knew that I
wasn't prepared to deal with all the questions
that people were going to have. I already knew a lot
of what the objections would be from a traditional
Christian point of view. And my commitment was
essentially a feeling commitment and one that I
wasn't really willing to question at that point.
So after I went back from there, I think I went to
Kansas City for a short time to try to help
establish a center there. I went back to Manhattan
later on in the year. It was thought for a while that
I would try to go back to school and run for student
body president, which of course would have been a
real coup. I would never have been elected if
people were too weirded out by me wearing a tie at
school and my beard shaved off. And so I wouldn't
have had a chance. But in any event, that was
considered. I got a call to join the New Hoop
Singers, which was a singing group that was
established to accompany Moon on his speaking
tours to the United States, the tour, the
eight-city tour that started in Carnegie Hall in
the fall of 1978. And I was in that group until I left
the church. We toured with him then, we toured with
him again. I don't know if it was later that fall or
in the next year. I tell you, the dates from that
whole era are very difficult for me to remember.
There are only two or three landmarks that I know
what the dates were. There were a couple of times
when we had breaks that I remember. We were in
certain places and I remember events, but
everything is very jumping together. We traveled
without a whole lot of sleep a lot of the time and
were working very hard all the time. Never had
enough time to rehearse. It was artistically
extremely frustrating.
Although I had some creative moments while I was in
the church. I think that that kind of discipline
and intensity can in some instances be a boon to
creativity because there's so much structure.
And I think most artists will agree. Like for
Stravinsky, he would set a problem, and once the
problem was solved, the piece was composed. And so
establishing a structure within which one has to
work is one of the first and maybe the most
important part of having something happen
creatively. And I did some interesting arranging
while I was in the church, some things that I still
like a lot. Not much composing. It was almost all
arranging, as I recall. How
is the structured life used to keep members in the
church and to get rid of any doubt that they're
having? Well, you know rituals in any culture
serve to kind of give one stability and structure
and help you make one step to the next without
having to stop and think about the next one. That's
parallel. You know, if you have to ask why about
everything you do, then you don't get anything
done. And within the Church, you know going
working very hard many many hours all the time
seven days a week with very very few breaks
certainly no long vacations if there was ever a
break it would be like a day-long trip or something
like that or and often it's not a big festival at one
of those big homes either on the west coast or the
east coast or wherever you happen
to be um
What that serves to do is give you some stability on
a day-to-day basis and small tasks to accomplish.
And, of course, that's very important within the
theology of the church, too. All of these little
tasks have their spiritual role and their
spiritual component. But it also keeps you from
having time to think very much on your own. You're
always working with other members. The hardest,
acknowledged by the church, is the hardest thing
is to have a person go out and try to establish a
center on his or her own. And that would be hard in
any event, because it's just hard to do that sort of
thing alone. But most of the time, the people live
in groups, and particularly fundraising and that
sort of thing is done in groups because it just
takes a lot to keep each other built up. I think the
normal peer group pressure is used. I mean, it's
peer group pressure the way you see it in other
things. The only thing is that what it's
reinforcing is a very intense manipulation that
goes far beyond what group pressure can
ordinarily influence. Were you involved in a lot
of fundraising activity? Some. I was never
involved on what they called a mobile fundraising
team, MFT. But while I was with the New Group
Singers, we did a fair amount of fundraising. I was
never a particularly successful fundraiser. I
was pretty average. I'd average $100 a day.
selling flowers or something like that, or
between, I would say, 70 and 120. I did get somewhat
better as time went on. The biggest day I ever had, I
think, was $200. But there are some people who can
do $500 a day for 30 days in a row. I don't think that
the fundraising is carrying on to the same degree
now. They've become much more involved with the
business. Of course, all this stuff about the
fishing industry that they were trying to work
their way in and have, I think, pretty effectively
worked their way in. They were providing cleaning
services, doing all sorts of stuff. If they would
have followed Moon's advice, he wanted them to try
to corner the flower market. in the 70s. And if they
would have followed his advice and really been
organized about it, they could have done quite a
bit, I think. Because the thing is, you know,
essentially they don't pay the labor at all. And
they order in tremendous bulk, and they sold
flowers to people
for donations. You know, a dollar for a carnation
kind of stuff. So the profit was just
unbelievable. And, of course, that's why he ended
up having so much money. But, no, I wasn't involved
with that much money. Do you think the fundraising
activities helped strengthen the group's
cohesiveness? or help the members identify more
with the group? Yeah. Fundraising is very
difficult work. I mean, you're on your feet for 12
to 16 hours a day. It's unbelievably difficult.
And running a lot of the time, and you're having to
meet people, and you're having to sell this group
to people all the time. And a lot of the fundraisers
lied. As a matter of fact, I think all of them
probably. I can't imagine how a person could have
been a successful fundraiser without doing quite
a bit of lying. So you were involved in the process
of deceiving the world to try to take away its money
to build up the Heavenly Kingdom all the time. So
yeah, it was... If you lived through it... And
there's some people who didn't. I mean, I know of
some people who cracked under the strain. And the
church would just send them home. You know, they
have a mental breakdown, something like that.
They'd just send them home. No money, no nothing.
Oh, gosh. It was some terrible tragedy. The first
member from Kansas who joined was on a roll of
fundraising. He finally had a mental breakdown
while fundraising barefoot in the snow on the East
Coast. And they just sent him home. He ended up in
Topeka State Mental Institution because his
family didn't have enough money. Yeah. Yeah,
pretty tragic. Anyway.
But I would say that it does build up the group and
also... Yes, I do think that those activities, and
the witnessing was carried on in much the same
manner, but witnessing the members always found
much easier to do or much more grateful because
they were in the process of actually engendering
positive responses, people who would join the
church and that kind of thing. But yeah, they did a
lot to build the members up. I mean, that was the
kind of activity, both of those were the kind of
activity where you were putting your faith on the
line all the time in difficult actions. And that's
what builds a person up. what was your reaction to
reverend main's vast personal wealth and did the
church try to justify it at all well yeah the
justification was built in to the ideology in the
sense that the true parent of mankind deserved to
have everything and that
You know, that was never an issue. It's very
interesting. I know for the people outside, boy,
how could he have all this and you have nothing? And
they obviously don't understand the mentality. I
mean, I think that's one of the best examples I can
think of of people just being incapable of
understanding the extent to which the mind
control existed in the group. But that was never a
question for me, and I don't know anyone for whom it
was a question. Maybe one or two people who were
kind of marginal and people who... in one case I
know left the church, in the other case I don't
know, on their own, that is to say, deprogramming.
And that sort of thing happened too. A lot of people
looking at the church from the outside, they have
to say it's either you have 100% control over them
and they can't do anything on their own, you have to
let them go by deprogramming, or the other extreme
liberal ideas, Well, it's just like a convent. You
know, well, neither of those is really true.
People do leave on their own, and there were
greater and lesser degrees of control, and the
person exerted, in a sense, exerted the church's
control over themselves. But on the issue of how
much money he had, that was just never a big deal.
And the thing is, is that...
There was in some ways a beautiful quality about
the simple lifestyle. I mean, I think that a simple
lifestyle can do wonderful things for a person's
sense of material value. I will never again be so
hung up about money. I can recall feeling very
guilty when I bought myself a 59-cent Coke with
money that I had raised in fundraising. And there
were some members who justified it in saying, you
have to have those kinds of things from time to
time. And I think those were the wise ones,
probably. But the thing is, when I left, I just
realized that things are for using. And this is not
universal, but it was a lesson that I took from it.
Things are for using. They're for enjoying. They
are important. But they are not important in and of
themselves, but they are important because of the
relationships that can be developed and enjoyed
and the life experiences that can be had with them.
That's all they're for. And I think there was
probably a sense of that in the church, at least
with some of the better people who I knew. And like
when he, when Moon would throw a party and would buy
Big Macs for everybody, he loved McDonald's. He
went to McDonald's all the time, and he would buy
Big Macs for everybody, and it was like communion.
You know, some very beautiful, intense
experiences. Or they would fix Korean food, and I
still love Korean food to this day. And we would
share that, and it was so wonderful, so beautiful.
He would give gifts, like ties, to the guys who
finished the training session, or take them to New
York and buy them all new suits, or something like
that. And there was a real... Yeah, it was very
manipulative, but there were some very positive
feelings and some, you know, that people didn't
take things for themselves. I don't know any
instances of graft, for example, and that sort of
thing while I was in the church. I don't know of
people taking money that should have belonged to
the church. I'm sure there were some, you know. You
have somebody who left the church and took with
them a whole bunch of money or something like that.
But essentially,
people didn't get hung up on material as much. The
church was very hung up on material, and they were
trying to get as much of it as they could, for sure.
But in terms of on a personal level, I think
material things were important because they
could be gifts, or they were important because who
had given them to them. And there were some
attractive things about that. But as far as
resentment against Moon, I certainly never
experienced any, and I don't know if there were
members who did or not. That's not to say that I
think it was appropriate, that looking back now I
think it's appropriate or that it's right that he
had those things. If he were who he said he was, who
they said he was, you know, I suppose that it would
be okay. I don't think... that a person who was the
Messiah would have that much stuff and would
treat it that way, but I'm not in a position to make
that kind of judgment. What was your diet like in
the center and on tour?
A lot of rice.
Very little meat, of course. We had some cooks who,
having had experience with macrobiotics or
natural foods, would cook a lot of vegetables and
we'd have a lot of fruit. Sometimes we ate fairly
well from that point of view. Sometimes we had
people who knew nothing about it and all we had was
rice and soybeans, a lot of soybeans as well. Very
little meat, but that was because it was
expensive. I don't think that that was a
deliberate technique to bring down the line
through deprivation of proteins. Although some
of that may have happened, I don't know. There was a
time when the New Hope singers were so poor, we had
to raise our own money as well as rehearsing and
that kind of stuff. That was a common technique
within the church. Make each group support
itself, plus send in a lot of money.
We lived for a week on peanut butter. while we were
on tour.
But essentially it was sort of...
I don't know what it would be comparable to. Really
bad school cafeteria a lot of the time. Now, I've
heard some people say that there was some protein
deprivation going on. I think that's possible. I
don't think that it was a policy of protein
deprivation through the church. While we were in
Japan and Korea, we ate better than we did when we
were in the States. They made sure that we were well
fed all the time. Which meant white rice most of the
time. I think a lot of us who were redder had brown
rice or some other thing. But white rice is what you
serve to companies, so that's what we got. We had
some really good meals while we were in, but mostly
food was very functional. Any thoughts? Lots of
rice and lots of coffee.
What were the circumstances surrounding your
leaving the church? Tape number four.
In 1973, in October, we had just returned from
Japan. We had had some really incredible
experiences in Japan and Korea. We played for like
a million people. I'm sure it was in the range of a
million people. The estimates went from 600,000,
which I think was people trying to minimize it, I
really do, because it was people as far as the eye
could see. I mean, it was unbelievable.
Unbelievable. They were not all members by any
means, don't get me wrong. By no stretch of the
imagination were they even, you know, the church
members were a small minority. It was a political
rally that was staged. And he used all of these
Westerners, members of the church, to travel
around Korea trying to get people to come to this
thing, passing out handbills and stuff like that.
And so the Korean people were very interested. Who
is this Korean man who has all of these Westerners
running around? You know, it was a good ploy on his
part. And I'm sure he helped his stock in Korea
quite a bit, particularly with the government.
But anyway, had a lot of those kinds of
experiences. We came back to the United States. We
were supposed to have gone through the singing
group I was in, that is. We were supposed to have
gone through a training session in New York, and
then we would go back into rehearsals. Some would
be given other assignments, and the group would be
a little bit reorganized and continue traveling
and performing. My grandmother happened to be
fairly ill and in the hospital at the time, and I
hadn't seen her in years and hadn't been, since I
had joined the church two and a half years, and
hadn't been with my family for quite a while. And so
when they discovered that, since ancestors are
very important, they allowed me to go home. Now I
had a dream before I left, the night before I left,
that my parents were going to try to deprogram me,
and I was responsible. to tell my able. But I knew if
I did, I wouldn't get to go. So one of the very few
insubordinate things that I ever did when I was in
the church, a minor thing to a degree, but, well,
they wouldn't consider it minor, of course. But I
did go home.
My parents had tried to talk me into leaving the
church before. My dad had flown out, had spent
Christmas with me that year, the previous year,
72. He spent Christmas with me instead of with the
family before I left for Japan and Korea because he
tried to talk me to stay. He never even really
raised the subject. I mean, he knew from the
discussions we were having that it was evil, but
what we did, we were able to spend a little bit of
time together since he had come out to see me. The
church respected that. I mean, they realized that
he had made a tremendous sacrifice to come out to
see me. And so they were willing to let me spend some
time with them. Although certainly not days on
end, you know, but a few hours here, a couple hours
there. Anyway, so they allowed me to go home. And
she was out in Colorado Springs, so I flew into
Wichita and drove out to Colorado Springs with my
folks. I don't think the church knew that I was in
Colorado Springs. I had thought that she was in the
hospital in Newman, which is where my parents
live, in Newman, Kansas. So I don't think they knew
where I was. I don't recall that detail very well.
But in any event, we went out and we visited my
grandmother in the springs. And I have an aunt and
uncle who live there. They told me that they had a
Sunday school party that was being held up in the
mountains, and they needed to take up some pots and
pans. So we went out to dinner at a cafeteria, and
then we took off up in the mountains, and I was
exhausted, and I fell asleep in the back seat. And
so I got into the, went into this house, cabin up in
the mountains and met some people from the Sunday
school class and went downstairs and my dad
introduced me to Ted Patrick and I found out the
party was for me.
Very interesting. This was in the evening. I don't
really recall what time, I suppose. 8, 9 o'clock,
10 o'clock. I don't really know. Anyway, there
were some big guys there. And I knew that I was not
going to be able to walk out the door. And I also
knew, they were up in the mountains, and I knew, you
know, I had no idea where. I just, I had no idea at
all. I had fallen asleep, you know, so I was, could
have been in Wyoming, probably, or New Mexico.
So I sat down there, and Patrick was using his
standard lines. He would sit there and ask me
questions about the church, but he had his own
answers, you know, so he'd ask me a question, I
would give him the standard line, and he would say,
no, this, this, this. And he baits people. He would
read passages from the Bible, like the one about,
let no man have you called him father, or this sort
of thing. And he would insert Moon's name. Do not
let Sun Myung Moon have him call you father. It's
just to make you angry. And in some ways, that's a
pretty good tact, just because once you start
getting angry, then you start drawing on your own
personal resources. And once you start doing
that, then you begin to realize the distance
between, the member begins to realize the
distance between his or her own personal feelings
and own morals and own standards of judgment in
those of the church. And that's the beginning of
the process of breaking away.
I was a little... I mean, I knew what this was going
to be like. I had a sense. We had already talked
about it in the church, and I had heard stories from
people. And also, I kind of had a sense of what it
would be like. I mean, I just could imagine it in a
way. And so I essentially faked through the first
evening. And I knew I was supposed to have an
emotional breakdown and embrace my parents and
tell them I had to go back to the church, and I did.
And so they were real happy, and Patrick was happy.
He was like, oh, he's going to be fine. He'll be
fine. Well, I don't know if they had a sense of how
much I was faking or not. I don't really think they
did. I've been through enough deprogrammings to
have a pretty good sense of what happens on the
other side. And I think they thought it was over,
that there might be some problems that they didn't
know. But anyway, so Patrick left the next
morning. He left
a couple of former members there with my family and
my aunt and uncle and their friends who were
serving as security. I knew that they were going to
want me to sign a statement saying that if I went
back to the church I wanted them to, I gave them
permission to have police come in and take me out.
And I knew that in order for that to have any kind of
legal binding effect, they were going to have to
have at least a
signature from the media.
You know what I'm talking about.
You know what I'm talking about. Notary.
Yeah. So I knew they had to have at least a notary,
too. And so I thought what I would try to do was get
them to take me to a law enforcement office to sign
it. or at the very least have a notary public come
out. I figured that was the contact with the
outside world, the objective outside world. The
next morning I saw that we were right close to Pikes
Peak. And so I figured if that fails, then I would
just simply take one of the chairs from the living
room and throw it through the window and myself
after it and I'll head for the peak and certainly be
able to get out somehow, you know, get forestry
service or something. So that was my plan. Well, I
was able to persuade them to take me to a law
enforcement office, a local sheriff's office, to
sign this paper. We walked into the sheriff's
office. I went up there on a Thursday night, and
this was Saturday. I went to the sheriff's office
Saturday morning. And I walked in, and I told the
guy, listen, these people are holding me against
my will. They're trying to force me to change my
religious beliefs, and you are responsible for
protecting me. My dad nearly had a heart attack. I
have never seen him so close. And the guys were just
livid, the guys who came along with him. There were
two guys. And all three of them were just going
crazy. They were screaming and yelling. And they
just couldn't believe this was happening. And I
was sitting there very coolly trying to explain to
this guy. He happened to be the undersheriff. Why
it was that he had to give me asylum. I said, I'll be
happy to talk to a psychiatrist. I'll be happy to
talk to lawyers or whatever, but do not let them
take me back because they're holding me against my
will. Well, there was a children of God compound
not too far from there. And when they started
talking about brainwashing, and he saw that I was
sitting there very coolly, calmly, just talking
to him very normally, while my dad was on his knees
pleading with me to go back, and these other guys
were screaming their heads off. I think he
realized that probably something like that was
involved. He didn't want to get involved in any of
that, so he let them carry me out of there. And he was
really liable. I mean, we could have sued him up one
side and down the other so bad. Well, at that point,
I knew that it was probably not my sense of mind
anymore, that I had blown my best chance. And that
if there was a chance to escape, I would, on the
other hand, if the truth's the truth, you know. So
we sit and talk about it. And if it's the truth,
fine. I don't have to worry about it. And I figured
that I would end up letting them get much closer to
what I really believed and just be much more open
with them. And so I did. And what happened was,
during the next week then, these people who were
staying with me, they hadn't been in the church
nearly as long as I had, didn't know half of what I
knew. Patrick didn't know half of what I knew about
the church, I don't think. He was showing me films
and telling me all this terrible stuff. And I was
saying to myself, you don't know nothing. Having
been in Korea and Japan, I had heard some pretty
weird stuff. I had been traveling with women. I had
served as a bodyguard for them. They just had no
idea the kind of things I had been doing or the kind
of stuff I knew about the church. So as time went on,
we read Helter Skelter and parts of Helter
Skelter. And I recognize some similarities, and
there really are. I think that people who say that
that's just scare tactics are wrong. I think that
there are some similarities. very obvious
similarities between the two groups. The Jones
People's Temple, same thing. There are a lot of
similarities. The ideologies are different, and
some of the tactics are different. They tend to be
much more violent, of course, than the
Unification Church. But the same kind of control
exists, I firmly believe, and I think could be
demonstrated by looking at psychological
profiles.
Anyway, after a few days, one time we were sitting
down, and I was reading a passage from Matthew, a
business about how Jesus is accusing the
Pharisees of being whitewashed tombs, and
talking about how, you know, you
make these proselytes, you know, more fit for hell
than yourselves. You know, the passage I'm
talking about, Matthew 24, something like that.
And I realized that because of the deception that
the church engaged in, and I was involved in it, and
I was very aware of it, and it bothered me on a
personal level, even though I could understand
the reasoning for it and was committed to it as a
committed member of the church. I realized how a
person could really hold that up against the
church and say, you know, that's a real drawback.
And the first time I read it, it really affected me
emotionally very deeply. The second time I read
it, much less than the third time, it didn't affect
me at all. But at that point, I was aware enough of my
own responses emotionally. But suddenly I was
thinking, well, that's really wrong. It really
shouldn't be that way. That's not the kind of
person I am. And I really resented the kind of
emotional manipulation that I had been subjected
to and was subjecting myself to as a member of the
Church. And I began to, and I realized very
quickly, and it was something I had probably known
but not allowed myself to be conscious of, was that
my commitment to the Church was essentially a
manipulated one. It was not an authentic one, as I
said before, one that was carefully reasoned and
thought out and made from the basis of a lot of
choices. It was one that I was forced into, and
coerced into, and deceived into, most
importantly. And that made me really angry. And
all of a sudden, I just had this overwhelming urge
to feel my own feelings. Now, that may sound very
bizarre to you, but I really felt like I had been in
the process of only feeling what the Church wanted
me to feel for such a long time. And I had a real
desire just to feel my own feelings. And it was like
there was anger there, but I wasn't experiencing
it. It was kind of a strange, almost dissociation.
And in order just to feel... My own anger and my own
hurt, I started hitting the wall. I still have
scars on my hands from hitting the wall in that
basement. And my hands started bleeding and I
started sobbing, just terrible choke, you know,
horrible choke. Choked sobs, just bleh. That was
it. At that point, I had a tremendous sense of
sadness that I knew that I could never be the same.
There was an element of relief to it, but it was a
great deal of grieving. It was sort of like
realizing that your marriage isn't going to work.
Something you've committed yourself to forever
is just not going to work.
It was very painful, but I think even if I would have
gone back to the church, I would have loved it. It's
interesting, since that time, I haven't had this
dream for a long time, and the dreams have changed,
but from that time on, for a number of years, I
dreamed about going back to the church and going on
with life. It's like I knew that even though there
was attraction for me there, I had some wonderful
experiences there and some beautiful friends,
wonderful people, and some very beautiful
experiences, very intense, of the kind that only
come in that kind of intense encounter. Not to say
that kind of intense manipulation. I think it can
happen in other ways. And I've certainly had many
beautiful experiences since. All the more
beautiful because they happened in and of
themselves among adults
who had freedom of choice. Even so, there were
still attractions and things that I had liked
about it and people who I had loved that I could
never go back and stay.
The whole process was about, we were in that cabin
for about two weeks. After five days, I was done. I
had left the church inside. Not to say that I would
never have gone back at that point, but like I said,
I think I would have left eventually. After two
weeks, I think I was very settled. They weren't
secure about me at all, and of course, after the
trick I pulled at the Hunter Sheriff's Office, I
don't blame them. But, oh, less than a month later,
they let me out in the car by myself, and I had a
sense, pulling up to a stop sign in Newton, well, I
know that I could head down the street and be in
Wichita at the center in an hour, and just... It was
kind of fun to know that I could do it if I wanted to,
but I knew I didn't want to. That was it. For me, it
was a very clean break, an emotional abreaction.
But for many people it's not, and it's too bad.
Because it makes it much easier, like I said,
dealing with the guilt and the feeling of
responsibility. As a matter of fact, I even had one
person say, you know, you really don't take
responsibility for that experience. And I had
just to admit to myself, no, there's a way in which I
don't. I feel like a lot of the responsibility for
me getting involved lies with the Church. And I
won't say none of it lies with me. And not that I
didn't learn a lot of valuable things, but the
sacrifices were extraordinary. And the
commitment, extraordinary as it was, and as much
of a learning experience as it was, and you can
never say this was better or that was worse about
your life. I mean, I sort of take it as a piece and
feel like in the whole I've been very lucky. Still,
I think it was primarily a negative lesson in my
life. And while I would not say that the
Unification Church is something that should be
outlawed, I
think that there needs to be sort of a truth in
advertising kind of enforcement that happens by
groups like that. And I don't know how much the
government can do. It's a real quandary. That's
why I've done a fair amount of lecturing and stuff
like that to try to help educate people. I feel like
that's the best thing that can happen. But the
level of manipulation that goes on in coercion in
that group and the level of deception that is
involved is really not evident to the outside
world. People who've not been through it, I don't
think, can really appreciate it. And I don't say
that about a lot of things. I firmly believe in the
value of symbolism and the ability of people to
share experiences through art, for example, and
stuff. And I hope someday to write an opera which
will help people understand. I wouldn't even
write it just for the... to be anti-cult. Just to
say, this is a very intense human experience which
is worth trying to explore through the different
kinds of symbols that are available to artists.
But I think, essentially...
You know, it's like trying to
make the association between
a lake and the ocean.
The two are both bodies of water, but they're so
dissimilar. When I'm speaking, I have such a hard
time coming up with metaphors that will help
people understand. I use a Chinese fire drill to
talk about group pressure and how differently
people behave than they would by themselves. But
it's really hard. Most people just can't imagine
letting somebody else decide who they're going to
marry. I mean, it takes them into the realm of
fantasy. And they can't imagine how that can
really happen. And they don't understand the
tremendous psychological dynamics that have to
be in play in order for that to take place. But I was
looking forward to it. I was a committed pacifist
who had gone through a very painful transition
from wanting to be a Marine to finally rejecting
violence as a means of solving human problems. And
that was a very carefully-reasoned and mature
choice that I had made. I say mature, maybe rather
presumptuously, but it was certainly the most
difficult process I had gone through. And I tossed
it all over in the matter, really, of a few minutes,
when I joined the Unification Church. was willing
to go to war for South Korea, not even just for the
United States. So it's a really extraordinary
thing, and there's hardly any explaining it. It's
just sort of a phenomenon. I'm not suggesting that
people become involved to experience it, but to
see the degree to which an individual can
give up their own choice-making responsibility
and opportunities is really amazing. And it's a
frightening lesson. I think that the parallels
that have been drawn between it and Chinese
brainwashing, although I think brainwashing is a
very bad term, because it's not really a washing of
the brain. The Chinese think that they wash away
the old character and install a new one. That's
their materialist point of view. It's evident
from the people who go through that process and
come out that, at least on the short term, that's
not what happens. Because most people who come out
end up being much more similar to what they were
before they went through it than what they were
after the process. and certainly you don't have
the kind of physical torture that some of the
Westerners went through, but if you examine the
process that the Chinese intellectuals went
through in China, the similarities between that
and what happens with the Unification Church are
very frightening. If you take away the element of
enforced participation, which happens in China,
The Unification Church gets participation
through deception, and giving people something,
or making them think they're getting something
that they're not, other than what they're
getting. If you're willing to make that
substitution, then the similarities are
unmistakable.